Hello, everyone. We're so happy to have you with us for this month's broadcast.
As you can see, I have a friend with me as co-host. We are friends, aren't we?
Yes, we are, David.
Oh, that's so good to hear.
Now, this is Herman van Selm. He's a helper to the writing committee.
And we work together every day in the writing department.
Herman has quite a background.
He was born in the Netherlands and spent a number of years as a missionary in South America.
What was that like, Herman?
Thank you, David, for asking.
My wife, K and I, served in three different lands.
Now, to sum up that part of our life, three words come to mind.
Challenging, amazing, rewarding.
In one challenging assignment, we lived in a remote area in the rainforest where there were no other witnesses.
We wondered, will we be able to find people who want to serve Jehovah?
Where do we start?
We got on our bikes and visited all villagers.
In time, we conducted about 25 Bible studies.
Wow.
Now, despite fierce opposition from neighbors, the Bible students made amazing progress.
For example, one woman with her children worked hard to build this beautiful hut
and brought the two tears when she told us, this hut we made for our meetings.
It is for Jehovah.
Amazing.
One day, a group of courageous Bible students showed us the letters they had written to resign as members from their church.
Now, that week, the church, pastor in that tiny village, received a lot of mail.
I guess mail he didn't want to receive.
It was no fan mail.
It was such a rewarding experience for Kay and me to see close up how Jehovah made that little group grow into a congregation.
In fact, it strengthened the faith of all of us wherever we may live to see how Jehovah cares for people who are often viewed as insignificant by the world.
But who are precious in God's eyes.
Great pictures.
I love it.
Now, what can the friends look forward to this month?
Well, David, this month, we'll meet Andrei Nismatchni, a retired professional soccer player,
whose story may help us to analyze our own priorities in life.
Later, we'll see how Thomas learns to balance his secular work with his spiritual needs.
And we'll enjoy an upbeat music video that reminds us all of the wonderful family we enjoy in Jehovah's organization.
Sounds exciting.
Let's get started.
This is the September 2019 program of JW Broadcasting.
This month, I'm going to talk about two different subjects.
First, I'd like to talk about the translation of our publications.
And there's a particular aspect of translation I'd like to comment on.
Now, I know that quite a number of you have moved to a country where your mother tongue isn't spoken.
Either defined work, or to serve or the need is greater.
And others are serving right at home, but in foreign language congregations.
At times, you may have compared an article in your mother tongue with the same article in your second language
and found differences in the translation.
And you might wonder why that is.
Oh, we'd never conclude that the translators had been unfaithful, or careless, or that they were running ahead of the organization.
No, we trust our hardworking brothers and sisters.
So we know there must be good reasons for the differences.
And the purpose of this brief discussion is to suggest what some of those reasons might be.
First, a word about one of the principles our translators follow.
They're expected not only to render the thought in the English text accurately, but also to keep in mind the way people speak.
So accuracy, clarity, and naturalness are needed while maintaining the dignity of our message.
Now, what's involved in preparing a translation does both accurate and natural.
It's not as if the translators are like the Jewish scribes who made copies of the Hebrew Scriptures.
To make sure that the copies they made were accurate in every detail.
They would count not only every word, but also every letter they copied from the source text.
Translations not like that.
It's not as if there must be seven words in the target language if there are seven words in the English.
Every word in the English may not be translated, but the complete thought of the English has to be there.
English makes effective use of repetition.
What do we mean by that?
Well, you can write one sentence in English, then repeat the same thought in slightly different words in the next sentence, and it sounds fine.
But in some languages, to repeat a thought would be viewed as poor writing, and that wouldn't reflect well on our publications.
So, in such cases, the translators are allowed to combine the two sentences into just one sentence as long as the thought is completely conveyed.
Or, they might make two sentences out of one long English sentence if that's more natural in the language.
So, you can't always compare the length of an English paragraph with the length of the paragraph in the target language and say, hey, this paragraph is shorter than that paragraph.
Sometimes we hear brothers who have learned a second language say, I don't see why the translators didn't follow the English word for word.
After all, you can say that in the language.
Well, you may have the words, it may be possible to say that, but what a literal translation sounds strange to native speakers.
No matter how well a foreigner has learned a language, native speakers who speak the language well are usually the best judges of what is natural.
Modesty will help foreign speakers to recognize that.
There's another thing that foreign speakers need to be aware of.
If they're vocal in their criticism of a certain translation, how would that affect the confidence of native speakers who have to rely on the translation for their spiritual food?
Of course, nobody's perfect, and as long as translation is done by imperfect people, it won't be perfect.
But rest assured that our translators take their work very seriously.
The subject of translation is complex, and I'm sure no expert.
Let's hear from some brothers who have worked in the field for many years and see what we can learn.
Meet Nick Aladis, Nick XRKs and Saki Moray.
As we have just heard, the goal of translators is to convey ideas accurately, naturally, and clearly.
This isn't an easy thing to do.
Let's discuss a few of the challenges of translation.
We will focus on three areas and see why translators make the choices they do.
Bible expressions, illustrations, and vocabulary.
So our first point is Bible expressions.
Nick, would you please tell us why translating some expressions in the Bible can be very challenging?
Well, before our brothers and sisters receive the new world translation in their language, they have to use Bibles produced by Christendom.
Often these Bibles contain false religious ideas and terms that reflect those ideas.
So when we produce the new world translation, great care has to be taken not to allow such terms to distort our translation.
Can you give us an example of an expression that was translated the wrong way in the Bibles produced by Christendom?
Well, one example is the term holy spirit.
In many Bibles produced by Christendom, the term gives the idea of a spirit creature in heaven, even a holy ghost, sometimes even a holy demon.
That must be very confusing to the readers.
But what can the translators do about that?
In many languages, our translators have found that the closest way to translate holy spirit is to say holy power or holy force.
This may sound very different, but it conveys the same idea.
And even the English New World Translation describes the term holy spirit as God's active force, at Genesis 1-2, while other English translations say God's Holy Spirit.
So now the brothers can use an expression that is understood by the field and the audience.
But it must be a wonderful thing to have the new world translation.
Yes, it's a wonderful thing.
But still, the brothers have to get used to the new terms.
Remember that they've been using the original terms in their local Bibles for years to teach people the truth.
But as they get used to the new terminology and their personal study at meetings and in the ministry, they begin to see the benefits of the new terms.
And afterward they really embrace the New World Translation.
Thank you.
Now let us go to the second challenge, illustrations.
Why are illustrations particularly difficult to translate?
An illustration that works in one culture might not work in another.
Illustrations are only effective if the reader can relate to them.
And that's why Jesus used illustrations based on everyday things that his audience was familiar with, such as farming, building, fishing.
And today our publications use illustrations that people can relate to.
I remember an article I discussed the need for us to be patient in difficult situations.
And it used the illustration of a driver who is stuck in traffic.
Now one translation team wrote to the translator help desk and they explained that most of the readers were not familiar with traffic jams.
For someone who lives in a big city that sounds unbelievable, but it's true.
So the team wanted to use a different illustration.
They are familiar with the idea of people standing in long lines waiting for their maze or corn to be ground at the milling machine.
And this illustration was approved because it would help the readers get the point they need to be patient.
Now these are completely different illustrations, but the point or the message is the same.
For example, then about being patient.
Now when we read in our language edition of the Watchtower or other publication, a different illustration than the one we read in English,
we can be confident that the translators received approval to make this adjustment so that the right messages convey.
Well that was very helpful. Thank you.
Now let us go to our third challenge that of vocabulary.
That is the words that are used in a language.
Now we might assume that for every important word in our language that they will be an exact equivalent in another language.
Well translation is much more complicated than that.
Take for example the word piece.
Some years back we had a convention about godly peace and one might think well that's an easy word to translate.
But that word was used about 350 times in talks on the convention.
Sometimes referring to peace between God and man.
Sometimes referring to peace in family or with our neighbors.
And other times referring to peace of mind.
Now in some language there's simply no way to use one word to convey all those aspects of peace.
Because they have one word for the kind of peace that God gives.
A different word when there's no war in a country, that kind of peace.
And a different word to indicate that people are getting along with one another.
So those translators need to understand the point of each usage in the context and then convey the right translation accordingly.
Now it opens our mind to how wonderfully Jehovah made us with the capacity to think and feel and have many concepts and ideas.
And to have the ability to express it in our language, in other words use words for that.
But we express them in so many different ways.
Yes this is so true. Every language has its own vocabulary and way of expressing things.
What I find very interesting is how other languages render standard expressions that we use as Jehovah's Witnesses.
For example, field service, circuit overseer, kingdom hold, special pioneer.
Those expressions were first used in English and then translators had to come up with equivalents in their languages so that it would make sense.
But that wouldn't be difficult would it be because for the word kingdom surely we have another word and another language.
And for the word hall we have an equivalent word and all you have to do is put the two words together to translate kingdom all.
They may have the words but a literal translation of kingdom hold could mean something totally different.
Now some countries still have a king. In those places this kingdom hold could mean government office or it could mean hall belonging to the kingdom of Jehovah's Witnesses.
So that would be totally misleading.
And that's why the governing body has given approval to say the meeting place of Jehovah's Witnesses or the hall of Jehovah's Witnesses.
Even though the expressions sound a little bit different the basic intent is the same and people get the right idea.
So it is obvious that the challenges of translation are huge.
But now the question how can a newly formed translation team or one in a very remote location.
Have the confidence and have the assurance that they produce the highest standard possible well all translation teams regardless of size or location benefit from regular communication with the writing committee of the governing body.
Well we understand that the governing body directs matters from headquarters.
But do they really know what the translators are doing?
Well the writing committee trust the translators but at the same time they don't try to micromanage their work.
What they have done is set in place training programs to teach translators basic translation principles to help them to understand how to apply those principles when translating the publications.
And this ensures that the same message is being conveyed regardless of language.
And they when they're not sure that their solution is exactly right on target.
They can write to the writing committee and ask for direction to inquire whether this solution conveys the right idea in the context.
Also the writing committee answers hundreds of translation questions every week as part of the ongoing training of the teams.
All of the translators have access to these answers so that they can learn from one another on how to solve problems which are delicate and difficult.
And this effective communication system really helps to unify the thinking of all the translators and make sure that they all produce the same message and that unifies the thinking of the worldwide field.
Well thank you very much for explaining those factors affecting translation.
And it is impressive that Jehovah has an arrangement in place that reverses the effect of Bable.
And it is also so wonderful that by means of his Holy Spirit, Jehovah unifies his people around the earth regardless of what language they use.
Thanks brothers, you've given us an even deeper appreciation for all the work involved in making a quality translation.
I learned a lot and I'm sure our audience did too.
Now the following video relates an experience that is very dear to my heart.
You see in the 1970s my wife and I were in the circuit work in Montreal, Canada.
The one Tuesday evening after the meeting I was approached by a ministerial servant.
He was very excited.
He said, David, I work for the man who is the head of a small church, he's invited me to his home.
That's nice, I said.
He said, no, no, no, you don't understand.
They never invite anyone to their home unless they're members of the church.
I think this is going to be big.
Well, I said, if he's interested, invite him to come to the meeting this weekend.
I'd love to meet him.
Well at weekend, I was on the lookout for the man, but he didn't show up.
But neither did the ministerial servant.
Soon after, on a Monday morning, fairly early, I received a phone call from brother L'Oriée Sommur,
who was well known in Montreal and was a special pioneer at the time.
L'Oriée said, we have a problem.
A thousand people want Bible studies, and many of them are going to be attending our meetings this week.
They were the members of that church.
I asked brother Sommur to take the lead in organizing the studies.
Now here's what happened.
The ministerial servant had been to the man's home and he'd given a good witness.
Then, the brother met with the other responsible men of the church.
They were interested in what the Bible says, and they wanted other members of the church to learn about the Bible too.
So, about half the members of the church, around 1,000 people, accepted the invitation to have a Bible study.
But what moved the leader of the church to invite the brother to his home in the first place?
Watch the following video, and I'll answer that question at the end.
In the mid-1970s, several brothers from the Montreal area were approached to help with a unique situation that was unfolding.
A special pioneer, who was taking the lead at the time, said that about 1,000 people, all from the same church, wanted to study the Bible with Jehovah's Witnesses.
And it was all because of an informal witness.
The story began this way.
A brother in the local congregation approached me one day to tell me about an experience he had with one of his workmates.
This man was responsible for a small local church, and the brother had been able to give him an informal witness.
The man indicated that he would like a Bible study, and he wanted to convince the other members of his church to also study the Bible with Jehovah's Witnesses.
The fact was, this person had a certain influence in the church.
So he talked to the church members about the message he had heard from the brother.
And he convinced them that what they were missing was a better understanding of the Bible.
Many people heard about it because it was an exceptional event.
From what I heard, there was around 1,000 people who wanted to study the Bible at that time.
We didn't have the brothers and sisters that were needed to conduct all these Bible studies.
So they formed groups of 10, 12, 15 people.
And once or twice a week in King of Halls, they conducted Bible studies.
It was questions, questions. Everyone was asking questions.
But the Bible could always answer all these questions in a logical way.
One verse would explain another, and we came to see that the Bible in its entirety could explain every subject.
At the beginning, groups of two or three family studied together.
And yeah, they answered with the Bible.
That amazed me because I didn't know the Bible at all.
But I thought the Bible talks about this, the Bible talks about that. It was like a discovery for me.
That was the parents. The children weren't there, so when we accepted it, then we teach it to our children.
Everyone was disciplined, sitting at the table.
The children were very quiet with their truth book in front of them and their Bible.
When these families came to the Kingdom Hall, the children were sitting beside their parents, not moving, paying attention to what was being said.
I was young when they started coming. I remember it very well. A lot of them were my age.
I saw them like future potential friends. It was really touching.
The first meeting I attended was here in Laval. It really contributed to me one day taking a stand.
And Jehovah becoming my God and the truth becoming my way of life.
When I was young, I was very afraid of death.
It was such a relief to learn that we don't suffer when we die. It's like a sleep.
The ambitions I had before that may have been attainable became second place.
Now it was to have a simple life, to walk with the organization and to raise my children in the truth.
Today these brothers are really doing a lot in the organization, helping in different areas, shoulders and great responsibilities.
My father always strived to set the example for all his children. And it made an impression on me.
Now my wife and I have the privilege of serving here at the Canada branch.
I was eight years old when my family started attending meetings.
I have really good memories of how the local congregation at the time took care of us and looked after us.
At the age of 15, I started reading my Bible every day and studying it too.
From that point on, I knew what I wanted to do with my life.
Serve Jehovah full time.
I really think Jehovah could see us on the inside. Jehovah helped us a lot.
You can't have anything better than that.
On our own, we never would have got out of that situation.
But Jehovah found a way to find rightly disposed ones.
A simple informal witness led to Bible studies that touched so many.
The brother was able to give a good witness, but what motivated the church leader to listen to him in the first place?
It was the brother's conduct. He was a very loving brother, and the way he dealt with others in the workplace really impressed the man.
The poet said, I'd rather see a sermon than here one any day.
Those words certainly proved true in this exciting experience.
That's an excellent transition into the next part of our program.
In this dramatization, we'll see for ourselves how a Christian's conduct, even at work, can have a powerful effect on those around him.
Sometimes, I really hate my job.
I don't know how Jason stays so positive.
I asked Jason why he refused the money, and I found out he's one of Jehovah's Witnesses.
My wife is true, so I know a lot about them. But what Jason did really surprised me.
I wondered why he didn't feel like he was entitled to the extra money.
He's such a hard worker, and most of our supervisors accept bribes.
Jason showed me a Bible verse, whatever you are doing, work at a whole soul as for Jehovah and not for men.
Jason's relationship with God influences every aspect of his life.
Even his attitude toward work, he couldn't participate in something dishonest, even if others do.
I could see that Jason really lived by his beliefs.
Jason invited me to see the construction project he's been volunteering at.
I felt like I had entered another world. People of different races worked alongside each other without prejudice.
And they were all volunteers.
Jason offered to study the Bible with me.
Emma has asked me to study in the past, and I've always refused.
But this time, I accepted.
I liked my study and even enjoyed going to the Kingdom Hall occasionally.
But I have to work overtime to support my family.
I can't go to meetings every week.
Hey Jason, how do you do it all?
Work, family, medias, even volunteer work.
I tried to keep in mind Jesus' words in Matthew 6 verse 22.
Jesus compared our eyes to a lamp.
He said if our eye is focused, our whole body will be bright.
It's impossible to focus on more than one thing at a time.
Jesus wanted his followers to focus on a single purpose, that of doing God's will.
Rather than being distracted by material things, my wife and I lead a simple life,
avoiding unnecessary debt or acquiring possessions that consume a lot of time and attention.
This way of life allows us to have time for what's truly important.
If you asked Emma, which do you think she would prefer?
She made more money or spent more time with her at the Kingdom Hall.
Jason's example really impressed me.
He was an honest and diligent worker.
But he also kept secular work in its proper place.
It made me think about the choices I make and I decided that I too
want to work whole soul for Jehovah.
James chapter 2 verse 17 and 18 in part states,
faith by itself without works is dead.
Show me your faith without the works and I will show you my faith by my works.
Now the faith that Jason displayed by works at his secular job motivated Thomas
to accept the Bible study and continue to make spiritual progress despite setbacks.
Seeing this and hearing of real life examples such as in our previous video are
excellent reminders of what a powerful witness our actions can be.
But what if you're in a situation where displaying faith calls for us to give up
something we previously loved or enjoyed?
The story of soccer player Andrei Nesmaczni may help us to see what action to take.
Soccer was my reason for living.
I was dreamed of becoming a professional soccer player.
I thought that happiness comes from vain.
A good career.
Money.
When I was six my parents signed me up for soccer.
I really love playing soccer.
It's been all my time at the stadium even laid into the night.
When I was 12 I learned about Jehovah from my mom.
At that time she started studying the Bible.
And after about a year I began to preach from door to door.
When I was 17 years old I finished school and I received an invitation from the
Dynamo Soccer Club in Kiev.
Oh that was unforgettable.
Yes my emotions were running high because since childhood I always dreamed of playing for Dynamo.
From that moment on all my energy and all my time were devoted to my career.
Every day we either trained or there was a game.
There was no time left for spiritual things.
Of course being around people like that I became just like them.
I led in a moral lifestyle because huge amounts of money opened up many opportunities.
Going to nightclubs.
The nightlife.
It was so immoral.
Everyone wants to be your friend.
To meet you.
And of course this was done thing.
I also invested huge sums of money in real estate.
I wanted to create a foundation for the future and wealth for myself, my family and my relatives.
So that no one would be in need.
Yes I was sure that this really was happiness.
This continued for nine years.
The turning point was a conversation with management when an issue came up.
And they hurled insults at me.
At that moment I felt worthless.
Like a disposable cup.
That you use then crush and throw away.
Besides a new generation of soccer players was arriving.
Many young guys.
I stopped being included in the starting lineup.
Also the financial crisis began.
And real estate prices fell drastically.
I panicked.
I didn't know what to do.
And I started to think about the meaning of life.
What really is the meaning of life?
If it's not a career, not money.
And what is it?
And then I remembered everything that I learned about Jehovah when I was a teenager.
I began to study the Bible again, along with my wife.
After a year I started preaching again.
And in 2009 I was baptized as one of Jehovah's Witnesses.
And this brought me so much joy and satisfaction.
These feelings can't be compared to winning any medal or cup.
I realized that I couldn't slave for two masters.
But I still had to play two more years for dynamo Kiev.
Although it was a difficult time, I took advantage of this opportunity.
And I'm thankful to Jehovah that a good witness was given about his name.
There were some soccer players who showed interest in the truth.
In 2011, when my contract ended, I finished my professional career.
First Timothy chapter 6 encourages us to place our hope,
not on uncertain riches, but on God and to be rich and fine works.
People ask me, do you regret it?
Maybe you'd like to come back?
Do you miss soccer?
And I honestly and sincerely say no.
I don't miss it and I don't want to go back.
Because my relationship with Jehovah can't be compared to anything.
Everything that this world offers is all short-lived.
And it's only an illusion.
People see only one side of the picture, the fame, the money.
The other side is the injures, disappointments.
It's very hard psychologically and emotionally.
You have no freedom.
That's why it's better to give the very best to the one who appreciates it.
What you do for Jehovah will always bring you happiness, joy and satisfaction.
Did you notice how Andre mentioned that he couldn't slave for two masters
and this led him to abandon eventually the world of professional sports?
Yes, often our faith moves us to leave behind careers and activities we once loved.
But to quote Paul's words at Philippians chapter 3 verse 8,
I have taken the loss of all things and I consider them as a lot of refuse.
Or as the footnote states, garbage, rubbish that I may gain Christ.
We can have confidence that anything we throw away for the sake of our spirituality
has no real value when we compare it to the blessings we enjoy as Jehovah's friends.
Back to you, David.
Thanks, Herman. That was great.
For my second discussion on this broadcast,
I'd like to talk to you on the theme, Do the Math.
Yes, you heard right. Do the Math.
Now, Math may not be your favorite subject.
But as we're going to see, someone has to do it.
Sometimes, doing the Math is the only way we can make a timeline
or get interesting background information that makes our Bible reading more enjoyable.
And you do want to make your Bible reading more enjoyable, don't you?
Of course you do.
Well, let's start with a number.
We might quickly skip over in our Bible reading.
Let's turn to Matthew chapter 19 and verse 28.
And let's see how a number can sometimes tell us more than what's written on the page.
Matthew 19 and verse 28.
Jesus said to them,
truly I say to you,
in the recreation when the son of man sits down on his glorious throne,
you who have followed me will sit on twelve thrones.
Judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Did you see anything interesting there?
I'll give you a hint.
These words respoke near the end of Jesus' earthly ministry.
Does that give you a hint?
I'll give you another hint.
The number twelve.
At this point, Jesus knew that only eleven of His apostles were going to be faithful.
Yet, He said there would be twelve thrones in the kingdom, not eleven.
What did it mean?
It meant that Judas would have to be replaced as an apostle.
And sure enough, He was.
Well, that was easy, wasn't it?
There was no math involved. It was just a number.
But let's see how doing the math can help us to answer a few questions.
During family worship,
one of the kids asked whether Noah and Abraham knew each other.
How are you going to handle that? Do you know?
You might just say the Bible doesn't say and leave it at that.
But you could figure it out if you did the math.
Now, here's what we know.
The flood occurred in 2370 BCE.
Now, that date is absolutely solid.
And if you'd like to figure it out for yourself,
you can look it up under chronology in the Insight book.
2370 BCE, that's the flood.
And Noah lived for 350 years after the flood.
So, by subtracting 350 from 2370,
we learned that Noah died in 2020 BCE.
But remember the question. The question is,
did Noah and Abraham know each other?
Abraham answered the land of Canaan in 1943 BCE.
Now, once again, if you want to prove that to yourself,
look it in sight under chronology.
You'll find everything you need to prove it to yourself.
So, 1943 Abraham, Abraham, in that case,
he enters the land of Canaan.
And he's 75 years old at the time.
So, Abraham must have been born 75 years before 1943.
Add 75 to 1943,
and you'll find that Abraham was born in 2018 BCE.
So, Noah died in 2020,
and Abraham was born two years later in 2018.
They never knew each other.
But it was close.
Our publications have often said that Jonathan was at least 30 years older than David.
But the Bible doesn't say that.
You're a progressive Bible student.
You know, the one who makes you prove everything, he asks you about that.
Can you prove it?
Can you?
You can, if you do the math.
King Saul ruled Israel for 40 years.
Then David became king.
The how old was David when he became king?
The Bible says he was 30 years old.
That means that when David was born,
Saul had already been ruling Israel for 10 years.
But when Saul became king,
Jonathan was a grown man.
He was probably already in the army.
You had to be at least 20 years old to be in the army.
So, if Jonathan was at least 20 when Saul began to rule,
and David was born 10 years after that,
what difference in age would there be between Jonathan and David?
About 30 years difference.
20 plus 10 equals 30.
Now, the next one is a bit more complicated.
It's the last one.
And we can do this.
Inside on the Scriptures says that Moses and Job
lived at the same time.
But the Bible doesn't say that.
How can we be so sure?
Once again, what do we do?
Do I hear it?
You're right.
We do the math.
Job's test must have occurred some time after the death of Joseph.
We know that because at Job 1, Jehovah told Satan
there is no one like Job on the earth.
No one.
Now, if Joseph had still been alive,
Jehovah would have said there was no one like Joseph and Job on the earth.
And if the test had occurred earlier,
Jehovah would have said there was no one like Jacob and Job,
Isaac and Job, Abraham and Job.
And remember, there were only two years between Noah and Abraham.
So we can conclude that the test of Job occurred after the death of Joseph.
When did Joseph die?
The date is solid.
It's 1657 BCE.
How do we figure that?
If you don't like math, trust me.
You don't want to know.
But inside, and the Bible will give you all the information you need
to figure it out for yourself.
But let's keep it simple.
Let's go with 1657 BCE.
That's 144 years before Israel left Egypt
under the direction of Moses in 1513 BCE.
So, Job's test must have occurred some time within that 144-year period.
Now this is a big hint.
144 years before Israel left Egypt.
Are you beginning to put it together?
Here is the clincher.
Job lived for 140 years after he passed the test.
So he was probably still alive in the land of us when Israel left Egypt.
Conclusion.
Job and Moses definitely lived at the same time.
So what have we learned by doing the math?
Superficially, we might say, well, we learned that Abraham was born two years after Noah,
and we proved that Jonathan was at least 30 years older than David,
and that Moses and Job definitely lived at the same time.
Superficially, we got the answers to those questions, yes.
But the fact is, probably none of those questions ever kept you up at night.
There's a broader picture here.
What we'd like you to take away is the fact that sometimes a number is more than just a number.
It can provide information that we couldn't get any other way.
And if we can understand that, this discussion will have been well worth having.
So, when you see a number in the Bible, don't run the other way.
Embrace it, stop and think about it.
You may be glad you did.
Well, after all that math, how about a little music?
This month's music video will let us experience some of the joy of traveling to an international convention
and meeting our spiritual family members from around the globe.
That song really captures the excitement that we feel when we meet new members of our family.
I certainly agree. It was great.
Well, this month we saw how our actions can help motivate right-hearted ones to accept the truth.
We peeked behind the scenes to learn how translation work is done.
And we even did a little math.
Herman, I love working with you on the Writing Department and I loved working with you on this project this month.
Thank you, Daisy.
Well, thank you. I really appreciate your help.
Now, I've been informed that many of you will be notified of the dates for your regional convention this month.
Would you like to know the theme for the 2020 Convention Program?
I'll lower my voice and I'll let you in on it.
The program is based on Philippians 4, verse 4.
And the theme always rejoice.
It's not a great theme.
We're going to have a great time advertising this convention theme.
Can you imagine having that on your convention badge?
And people will look at that badge and they'll say,
what do you have to be so happy about? And then we'll tell them.
But before we end the program, let's join Herman on a short visit to the country of Botswana
in the southern part of Africa.
Botswana is home to many natural wonders.
Among them is the Okavangu Delta, a natural haven for wildlife.
This country is also the home of the highest concentration of elephants in the world.
However, when it comes to people that are only about two and a half million residents spread out over this very large country.
And with only 2,316 publicers, the ratio of witnesses to residents is about 1 to 1,000.
So they always enjoy it when need graders offer to come and assist them as they cover hundreds of kilometers of undersigned territory
on preaching trips that can last for days or even four weeks in order to reach the most remote villages.
Currently, there are 45 congregations and two isolated groups.
The etsa congregation located in the Okavangu Moremi area is small with only seven publicers and no elders.
But the zeal of these publicers is amazing as they travel long distances, often on foot, just to attend meetings.
This travel is not only difficult because of the distance, but also because wild animals roam freely in the area.
Regardless of the challenges, the brothers and sisters enjoy coming together to serve Jehovah and to share in the ministry.
This congregation is just one of many examples of the faithful brothers and sisters throughout Botswana
who are spreading the truth into even the most remote locations.
And they want to share their love and greetings with all of them.
We send our love to all our brothers and sisters in Botswana and all of you, wherever you might be.
We love you all very much.
Until next time, this is JW Broadcasting from the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses.